Empathy is a quality that is essential for effective disciple-making.
Interestingly, the word empathy doesn't occur in the main text of the New World translation,
but the idea is clearly conveyed in expressions like fellow feeling.
Jehovah and Jesus Christ are beautiful examples of ones who display empathy in their dealings with authors.
For example, Jehovah said to his people,
whoever touches you touches the pupil of my ahai, empathy.
And when Jesus was approached by a leper, begging to be healed, what was Jesus response?
The account tells us he reached out his hand, touched the man and said,
I want to, empathy.
Empathy is the ability to understand another person's thinking, feelings, concerns, anxieties.
It may not come naturally, but it can be cultivated.
The scriptures provide us with examples of individuals who were empathetic.
For example, the Apostle Paul, who was a very effective disciple-maker, was also empathetic.
Turn in your Bible, please, to 1 Thessalonians 2 and let's read verses 7 and 8.
On the contrary, we became gentle in your midst,
as when a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children.
So having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you not only the good news of God,
but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.
How did Paul approach his ministry?
Well, he says he was gentle.
He displayed tender affection, and those who responded to the good news became beloved to him.
Paul uses a very powerful illustration, that of a mother caring for her children.
In the human context, there is probably no more powerful example of empathy than that of a mother.
She feels her child's pain.
When her child rejoices, she rejoices.
When her child weeps, she weeps.
Empathy.
And did you notice, Paul said he was determined to impart not only the good news of God,
but his own soul.
Isn't it true as we help individuals today?
It's not a matter of only imparting the facts of the truth.
Bible students need help in many ways.
And like the Apostle Paul, we're self-sacrificing, willing to put the interests of others ahead of our own interests.
We're empathetic.
In the following dramatization, take note of how Nita provides practical assistance to her Bible student.
It's fine. This is mine. My tree.
Brilliant. Thanks. I didn't have any breakfast.
So, we left off at paragraph 10?
Listen, I do have it in me today. I got like two hours sleep.
You are right. Just super stressed. I can't focus.
I'm really sorry.
My boyfriend, school, work, everything else.
I just don't even have time to breathe.
When my schedule gets a bit crazy, I focus on organizing what I can.
How about? I give everything a proper place.
Yeah, I'm not really the organisation type.
But I can help. I mean, if you want.
I guess a little help couldn't hurt.
So, how organised is your place right now?
Okay. Well, where should we start?
You're the neat freak. You tell me.
Let's try and find the bed. We'll work from there.
Did you notice how did Nita display empathy?
Well, she was observant. She was a good listener.
And she offered practical assistance, didn't she?
She had some food for her Bible student.
And at the end of the dramatisation, she was helping in other practical ways.
And I think we would all agree she showed fellow feeling for her Bible student.
You and I have to do these things as well.
Be observant. What do you know about your Bible student?
What are the student's circumstances in life?
What is the student's family situation?
Does the student have hobbies?
Entrists? What is the religious background?
What does your student believe?
We'll be observant and ask good questions.
And when you ask a question, give your student time to answer.
What is our inclination when we ask our student a question
and the answer doesn't come quickly?
We tend to jump in to save our student,
but that approach isn't really helpful.
When you ask a question, be patient.
Allow the student time to think and to respond.
And when the student responds, be positive.
Commend the student for being honest, forthright,
even if the answer is not exactly what you were hoping for.
And keep in mind as we observe and listen
and ask questions and display personal interest
we're very careful not to pry into matters
that are really not our business.
And we don't want to show inappropriate interest
by becoming overly familiar with a Bible student.
Does your Bible student need practical assistance?
Well, as we listen and observe,
we're in a position to share information
that will be truly helpful to the student.
Avoid the tendency, the temptation,
to give superficial advice.
It's much better to meditate, do research,
and then you can give the student tailored Bible-based advice
taken from Bible-based publications
that specifically address the student's needs.
And that is beautiful.
Be prepared too to explain how to apply the counsel.
People's lives are so complicated.
They face so many challenges they may not know.
So explain but don't pressure.
The best change always comes from the inside out.
In other words, the Bible students' heart
should motivate him or her to make necessary adjustments in life.
Does your student need transportation to the Kingdom Hall?
Well, assist.
It may be that you can provide transportation yourself,
or it may be a matter of helping the student
to know where the Kingdom Hall is
and then helping him to understand the public transportation system.
But whatever help is needed, take those steps.
Ensure that your student has wholesome association.
As time goes by,
your student is sure to lose former associates,
either because the student decides
or the former associates decide.
Fill the void.
And include your student in gatherings
in keeping with his spiritual advancement
and as appropriate.
Finally, show fellow feeling.
Remember, empathy is not a technique.
It's a quality that springs from the heart.
And it's communicated in so many ways.
Not just our words and our actions.
Our facial expressions, our gestures, our body language
all communicate a message to the student.
And the student will discern very quickly
if our words and actions are motivated by love.
If they are, then we are demonstrating empathy
and reflecting the love and concern that Jehovah has for the Bible student.
And that is what will draw the student to Jehovah.
What a privilege we have to share in this vital disciple-making work
with Jehovah's help may each of us succeed
in showing the quality of empathy.
Brother Gary Broho, a helper to the service committee,
will now present the final part of the symposium.
Experience the joy of disciple-making.
Improve your skills, reaching the heart.